If you could only choose
one chair from this house–
c2bd36eb559b4995becd484bbbab57ed
–which one would it be?
53f4452afc7048faa99f098f1130478a
I'm going to move away from here
to spring next year.
90fb0a04e92f44b4a6eadf19ef40a187
And I can't take them to heaven.
c85dc8af304346bdbe556366a67d71c4
Nordic design has conquered the world
for over a hundred years.
51cf5736f55b40d6b03a2400bd6e8636
I fell instantly.
92e37d76e702499ea3ede2102378877f
All rooms with this become: Wow!
99f9fb97056344ba9f02d46a0cfb8ad8
But what makes–
52dce9f1e05a44578829537ce4cc9ce4
–Nordic design enchant
collectors from around the world?
6ed2da8a04c84828bbdf9726476a4645
That wooden sofas and plastic chairs
are sold for fantasy sums internationally?
9e63b699bfff461d9e0b9cf3f6a2ec6b
From modest everyday objects to
immortal pop culture icons–
3f4abfee45cd466c9946d0246566338e
–seen both on film
and in the world's most exclusive homes.
65d2e79a562e4b2fbd16321240ab5602
This is a series
about a hundred years of Nordic design–
1bab56fe3e2f469593e3bd3d69a9deef
–and why it looks the way it does.
e76cd6483ae14cd9818593be27e890c4
Here in the countryside,
in Hokkaido in northern Japan–
7148c494fb364b5b93db32168ea5ac8c
–lives the chair collector and furniture researcher
Noritsugu Oda.
56be41271cc04f3cbaa35cfe64776eae
He has since the 70s been searching for
the optimal closeness to humans–
72d8def2d05d4bc8a6b1aeb0fe3a2f9f
–through searching
for the perfect chair.
a3557554d8e74b8abcea5ff57b5f4a61
Today I have about 1,450 chairs.
d5fbe9959af7494790ba3d261d532ec9
Most are from Scandinavia.
3c489a0c4e0942379373acb9a5954fc5
Objects of high quality
require a certain behavior from people.
f589229d537b4b69accfc2941f7b8a98
You shouldn't sit on a fine chair
in just underwear.
77015f63cc1a4f3780ea37079f336a81
After a whole life of searching–
b56279a0e51c49bc84a98b7e003141a4
–Mr. Oda has the world's largest
private collection of Nordic chairs.
264010f9f06349928000b71d39b061cd
His dream is that the furniture one day
will get its own design museum–
2ff8b051cc494ecd84a6ba036268ee27
–showing classic Nordic design.
fb0d00724a6040c386fe8e951610b996
Fast fashion, fast furniture, fast food...
aa37f1910cfe4ab09bd712d50857f0ee
Nowadays everything is fast.
370058b0a66145679b28bc2e8b29b31b
But I have a hundred-year-old furniture
that hasn't lost an ounce of its luster.
d9ee8847e766471bb5a38f36c4fea025
Solid objects possess a quality–
d15b667183244faba919b86137b8207a
–that can influence the world for the better.
ec533739f5c04588b1894df58ed98736
Nordic design is not only loved and coveted
by collectors around the world.
a030152f0914431d9d4c20f7b964133e
It also carries
a winding history–
759cffb3834b49ce82db44bdd0b1a53f
–about the past, present, and the designers.
7dae12e8af614fecbc62d73804a86ec4
How can a dish rack with boards
become world-famous design?
b01684316f2d4229b5da19f6daf45335
And how does it happen
when an abhorrent pattern–
0f218cbeea5940119d8b8a6ca78f117b
–becomes housewives' favorite?
ccdb6232106349d9a2cb955fee8981b5
And how can a small Finnish stool–
45b3ab8851ce4ef086e3568287237d3d
–be part of solving diplomatic
crises during the Cold War?
82f42b86b6b44d049547a7d79a5bdc1d
German troops have crossed the border tonight.
194d319dbf1e419691d25c572601869c
A new, big war has broken out.
d7e84a93232440eea2c7a17421b8361b
Bombs are falling over Finnish cities.
4eb87eec61444838807772da27b34887
Fights are taking place
all the way from the Karelian Isthmus to Petsamo.
256355766ab447e98f6bfe1ff9011d5a
When World War II breaks out–
7e57034b641c40b4a72948af527495b9
–the people in the Nordic countries
are affected in different ways.
b130f2ac9676401d9bc4d9a3f944bc77
Finland is involved in three different wars.
9a37a9c637514121a962f9f6e462711a
Denmark and Norway
are occupied by Germany.
c54229b5cad14e6c95524b4f64ed3311
Sweden as declared neutral but
several times breaks neutrality–
c5611804affa470bb0fb9e4fb824981d
–escapes being drawn into the war.
b34a712b76964a6fb619e658572c5678
To make the home warm and cozy with
soft materials and blooming fabrics–
2a6032b72e1f4a459ec40d4a09cef4ff
–is about enduring
the threatening world.
03c47d636e5f4c58868874de66f01529
Estrid Ericson, who runs the interior design store
Svenskt Tenn–
36d8708dc3f146cad0a6f3f2ccca947
–takes the task of making a cold time warm
very seriously.
f46060ba1d6e46afb697d0a11d65d7c7
As here, in the secretary's apartment
at Millesgården in Stockholm.
629b65ce9f824a35821b927520e92f69
It is nice to live here.
e24cf38415b64c8384725904bbab054d
It is messy here.
God, it's so much fun!
da2203391cb64cdab10a8b8da1b185e2
These
you don't put in the dishwasher.
6464736e49d349e891ce616333161a7c
When you go to Svenskt Tenn it all feels
perfect, fantastic, and expensive.
fa6941b13ed1405b88b9f488aad7bb73
But when you look at the detail level–
666be8f93a114e698335c164d4cfca60
–you notice that it was something else
that drove Estrid Ericson.
272cebafcc7b4f248356b88e5c01df52
A wild boar.
55bca32f4a7744ed9d3267df521331aa
Here you feel that you don't know
which glass you should be in.
962c6e0c599b4b9093857afb45feb24d
I would call her beauty addict, which I also am.
1a8b4606bd9748ff875263c9c3ded58a
A few years before
World War II breaks out–
661d2ba675bc44a1a40b63ae2f126506
–Estrid Ericson hires
the Austrian Josef Frank–
5b75dee7150d4f10ac3200bd2d92357a
–a Jewish architect
who has left his homeland–
80fa2b3b215b4910a3a7ea0bf8237c18
–due to the antisemitic
atmosphere in Vienna's streets.
78e50c852a1941d9a922813c29da054e
When Ericson and Frank start
collaborating, a kind of music arises.
07ad4bb6d4fd4a61aa10e7c95ed4c83a
I think Josef Frank understood
what Estrid Ericsson wanted to say.
d5eb6f3fa9164244a997874a1850049b
He understood her melody,
and they found a common language.
c83524b9252f4328b5300756ee329dd1
His fabrics and furniture
and her ability to decorate–
06814766520d48689f31f7f9e42e4644
–become soft, safe rooms that protect
against the hard reality outside.
85ce87316fa4421cb610e01aa317de32
When it is toughest
the imagination becomes liveliest.
308567973f9243b48801e792d85a6c9a
That is why it is so gray,
it must be color.
abf96286808645ffa74f64c8d0ed5270
They think: "Oh god, it is so gray.
It must be color."
1c69d4fc57c34561866ebcdda941c2de
It was a common understanding that
Estrid Ericsson and Josef Frank had–
0f51e4c011484c24bef5a2d49f037fcf
–to create aesthetic comfort.
f51199ed92524c6ba412eb18594685f1
Ericson and Frank protest
against Swedish squareness–
8a01b4ee65384640854ac51d202c7a4e
–and what they mean is a funkis- and
folkhem architecture completely without humor.
fee7ccdeb68f4bf9976cea931f02e9c1
The protest culminates
in a gigantic sofa–
57ad108548cd46ee849afab8464f22b0
–that goes completely against prevailing style ideals.
019ba41c03154d22a9768042244d31da
Josef Frank decides
on a big statement.
2c8925cd08bc4723a8c709d3c1789512
He shows his huge sofa,
called Liljevalchssoffan.
047bb3326a964f07a6dd01a8b7fa9ddf
1.40 deep and 2.80 long.
ae43efbb0f104f0d94fb99e91ee58ded
Absolutely not comfortable to sit in,
but wonderful to lie in.
acf607717e284687aadeb2b4108b9fb9
It takes SO much space.
He just: "Now I am here!"
4293945e458149579c96be2c8d52b971
Josef Frank
has settled in Sweden–
037aba331b094f15b376eb18de21670f
–but 1941 becomes the development of the war
so alarming–
2d08019023c0459b87c9f13038980c62
–that Josef Frank together with his
wife travels to Manhattan in New York.
65e8bc72ef5f495ba7649d7b40ccc2d0
Josef Frank is again in a new country,
but this time without work.
7b965716a04648b9a98435c5de23515b
To fill the days in exile he begins
to walk on Manhattan's streets–
3f7a5860a3c9443c82737bfee0225340
–which also becomes the beginning
of one of his most beloved patterns.
8001cd40d2e84a6ba7ebbe0ad8ed9290
He draws up the entire city plan
and all the addresses he likes–
debb6d049bd64bdfa476df5ca10fe788
–so we can follow him on Manhattan,
where he went.
d8a33a43fa8545929d4616b32e6e9adc
Frank draws what he sees
and what he reads about.
90c38cf0dc78490280962e8bdff05768
He discovers the bold color palette
that exists in Mexico–
1dc53a51fb9b4f52910c40d3f7349f96
–and mixes it
with his botanical interest.
4f622bb0e51f403aad9246d6e1089e3c
Out comes an entirely own flora
in an exploding color scale.
948e06c1e0a1499c9ef07bdf0eaab93e
He is funniest when he is
surrealistic and psychedelic.
2a279818936c4684babedf6ea5d221e1
It is a restraint in it–
ccc6df6aaffb47c48dec2882f1e09a61
–but he lets the colors lead the
wilder. It is this ear...
8c7f062e1b154b579c30a4a9d1d920f
I think Svenskt Tenn is finest
when it is just put together.
ec127903f47c4612b241cd08180f0755
There becomes a fun meeting
between the different patterns.
4ebba85bbe6a4e108f7c6d38438c879f
The patterns painted in exile he donates
to his friend Estrid Ericson–
bede0b14bf1e4526b9f2d239ed57a107
–and they soon become
Svenskt Tenn's signature.
d9760fdf06d84331953e3d8f7ea5cbd4
And when the Swedish pop group ABBA's
music becomes film–
4b72f91264ab41419f1c3b46f71e4fb2
–the Austrian's patterns are used as a
symbol for the most Swedish there is.
59dd03cdf5cf40478497ece4ec9fed3d
Mr. Oda and the Nordic chairs
have been closely intertwined for 50 years.
0518613e0b9f433c9a0cae2594e6e9ad
But it was the Swiss modernist Le Corbusier–
f9525602cb6f474d9522b7de0d7cd1d5
–who made Mr. Oda end up
in the chair hell.
5f03a0db406e4458955a8e46952a9b32
At that time
my salary was about 40,000 yen–
ce2a733674be43fa8ad446d63392cc44
–and the Corbusier chair
cost 300,000 yen.
5b165ffbba3f46bb940e3888dc1d7237
So I bought something that cost
seven times more than what I earned–
e0d77e51225048578404f91200146795
–so it became quite tight.
366f8f6dc4254c90a7dd4433f079032f
But when I finally had it
I felt nonetheless very satisfied.
6574da16906a46aa990819a0c9c1a987
The chair LC4
was the gateway for Mr. Oda–
b1665319574d4e11b4343b9a1d330a61
–but the obsession
only became bigger and bigger–
60269dc2a5f9498aafdcd8f29492b03d
–and eventually the chairs were close
to costing him more than just money.
d0bae2e4ae5d4c6e8a4cf0b1938a8454
For a long time no one understood me.
2f968568a3234984bbaee86b264b3bbb
For half a year I spent a lot of money
on chairs and kept it secret from my wife.
a7a486b15a294ebb9c7d462e0e6de43e
Once I had just spent
a substantial sum–
35af568f960f40829ba6e9a4a48489e7
–and our child
got high fever the same evening.
8c68a3a275d542f9b92582d7188ae886
Fortunately,
there lived a female doctor above us.
a08030276b954a3b90b74b6568344aed
So we took the child to her,
and everything ended well.
e5e4126d01c74bd0af9a907d1171b2f1
Between the years 1939 and 1945
Finland is involved in three different wars.
8ed305af005f457784b5fdf3fc7b5ecb
This affects everything, even art.
644855d04c42428db4fbd0ec5cd54173
And in the satirical magazine Garm,
the artist Tove Jansson debuts–
4727d06561a042e6bb9847485ee19173
–as political caricaturist.
974c41a3a16a4461b8a3d5e53600661b
Not that I was aware that it was so
remarkable.
f60b76ea03e44ed9bab5474818e9d7f7
I got assignments to do,
and then I was sometimes...
86e63a2473964b49812c552cde5dbd35
...so angry at Hitler, and then I made
a picture. It is so simple.
527ec996d9e547c9b746e59306fa84ed
She draws Hitler as a child
in a tantrum demanding more–
304f820e0f064da5934c3e449e76e044
–despite already having
large pieces of Europe.
0a2e83ad9f124f6da9d040160ce1a764
And it is in Garm that Tove Jansson
first draws this figure.
fab8f1f96ab747f9a5fb2ccabe789050
Then called Snork, but soon
got the name Moomintroll.
95b50282e98040549bf92ace8bdbbc52
It was a small recognition figure–
24263e67a12744e5a9ee5f98a64f1da2
–that ironically foreshadowed and expressed
what was happening in the very image.
6abff805bf6043c684ad8bad12e618cd
Then I took it up
and made it the main character–
741b2b1d5ccc42c1811ad683d8b0a9ac
–in all my stories for children.
33c918bcf9ed401fb47723f6117f364f
Then called Moomintroll.
d3789d7410294034acadb3ba14b00038
Tove Jansson's Moomintroll becomes after
the war books, comic albums, and film.
575d1811f735440ba23d05b135cf6a03
But also Finnish design.
7eef3138120c4117b879dd94988d9b3b
Together with the ceramist and glass artist
Kaj Franck–
3647ecd0b98b41ff8cadb877b53655af
–she makes the very first
Moomin tableware in the late 50s.
b30741f6c85140eba370c24564dda272
Have you during your long design career
considered doing something else?
53b6e950467d417e816d1beb81ff3dba
Like this?
Yes, I enjoy it anyway–
7ae9a798ad0a46298a7e85661579ec5e
–because it is something that is
constantly changing and organic.
a71c3dfa6d264fdf8d03eda81553ad1d
In design work you are often
faced with constraints or stress.
dae010628401489a8f7cdcb65ae059f7
For Kaj Franck's design
the war years play a central role.
5fd8eb6546324b21b2f76288e960c810
He spends five years
at the coastal artillery.
4cc769d12e7845b8baba12c25b1e4455
In the harsh everyday life he meets
people from a simpler background–
673c13f5e05a4f20a9f542af99be160b
–which makes him socially aware.
8ba5dd2c98cc4169832da63dca1fa3d3
There were relatively few men there–
eb0c2cc24c274cd5aaef6017e4df2e59
–but he got to learn
and gain understanding of–
78f0740edaa2441b98b6642ff3bcb522
–how they functioned and how they thought.
8108639e78794860bd62c95ce16bcd8c
This affected Kaj's design work
very much.
756fdfb0e2b143948eecdc35e43735b5
Kaj Franck, raised
in a wealthy cultural family–
337a2a6455f74b0dae9382fefaaaf92f
–is used to dinners
on elegant tableware–
4328f943df0245c0b70ec1de84becf85
–but during the war
gets inspired by the peasant society–
b2016023852f4962a8af6d3081bdd4de
–and by the allmog objects
that can be used for everything.
1abceee211934423a13d331ca3ae8e55
Kaj used to tell
that one of his guiding stars was the stone bowl–
eda8e6f20fde400e9dfbfd9faa0b5abc
–which was the household's most important object.
c2a2cba566b0497fb1cefbf99991c3f7
It existed in many different sizes
and was used for all possible purposes.
8b88238c46504cbfa63f072b161abbde
You don't need so many things!
f7c1b9aa8a4641609d2207b21de9ba42
With Kaj Franck the simple allmog bowl
transforms–
0525457b09ce4800b415462f2404ce1b
–into minimalist drinking glasses.
553a37e4d98a422fadc054c6195d58a3
Franck means that the form should be so
functional that the object doesn't notice.
693b33858fb543918644f690883e4d28
Yes, it should be so inconspicuous–
51de238be48d4907abc0fbd8ac9a9f5a
–that the user doesn't ponder
who designed it.
b35b9e7ad5e84838bb15ae205331b0ef
Even more radical he becomes when he
starts at the porcelain company Arabia.
30135d4308ea4ea7907449129b27e799
He saw decoration as unnecessary.
The object should be complete without it.
607965b5da884971989b02042c462de4
"Blow up the tableware!" he says and
rationalizes away handles, spouts–
ed637dc78c564612993925bfb4fa8249
–and designs lids
that fit several parts.
d9eec3609bfc40d2940b63eaaa097751
Color is the only decoration
that is needed–
d4465464153047d2b03a73fc4f344625
–and the tableware should be small and
fit in post-war homes.
06828575badb4a18a69b1cfe53fee2da
Everyone should be able to afford them–
0a4802d49a4841c6bfcddba1d9152630
–and they should be stackable
and storable easily.
e5b00a36ce5f4d2dbf0aa6a8393470cb
You shouldn't need a large tableware.
abc28d7627f44929bdd54b7b573eae70
Reasonable, simple, and small.
e79a6ad77df944218cc7d33b94670019
Kaj Franck's ideas were radical then–
3af1d13b055443adbc1f83ea29166422
–but self-evident
and highly alive today.
4899b440f78b47d9b19bbd65bc2ea429
One autumn night 1943 sits
two of the North's foremost designers–
fac06afdb47b42b99882de373336017c
–in a leaking rowing boat out on open
sea between Denmark and Sweden.
7021d83002fc4b33aba82eccc1a54a61
They flee from the occupied Denmark
to escape concentration camps.
015c41665c864686beb84fd0ebba65ba
One of the designers in the boat
is the satirist, revue maker–
2e057c748f494bebaecfc3af59ca1901
–and lamp constructor
Poul Henningsen.
ef61a25b95ab4c0cb77bba834f743e08
He is known for his lamp shades
that reflect light without blinding.
a6135e06c5b5481d878ceba37c22736c
He has during the entire 30s conducted
a loud campaign against Nazism–
cb1e018a538b46b786271ae8ddb7d380
–which is the reason
why he now flees.
1350da6f85934e41aaf38531f5e764cb
He wrote criticism and warned publicly
against the Nazification.
26cc673aa43046bf8e695e138de955b8
This provoked the occupying power,
and it was burning under his feet.
9cc621aeb8404d1fb0d4ff5a2d7202f5
In the escape boat sits also
the star architect Arne Jacobsen–
69a66706e6cf42cd9b34124ed5431c70
–who is of Jewish descent,
and his wife Jonna.
785da984896340efb25e547a82e0c227
It was a five-hour journey in the middle of the night–
9d9a9571c0d348168342aebee9e97a57
–from northern Zealand to Landskrona
in a rowing boat.
719979e721a046568dcd069412e6dac0
With two wives bailing incessantly–
23acd3a778974a9bada2651d886f07a3
–and architects who can't row,
in dangerous weather.
fd2910df1d614899b2509e9c100c7a6e
At one point German
patrol boats come and shine over the water.
2bb64e0870af462a8963045dea5d53c8
But they understand that they can't see them
down there in the rowing boat.
2d1b1b81d9e24cd5a05b5aaa81fe507f
Arne Jacobsen and his wife Jonna
do not only leave their country.
628fc0047257483db82adc83445b5d57
Jonna also has to leave her two
small children from a previous marriage–
7de14c6b802b4bb2bff1569739c377b9
–with the children's father.
4c9c544c97064976af9d5818fbe6fcda
I know that my mother
was very sad when she was left.
1897a1696fa2425c922c1c63db958857
Mom has now in later years said–
def5696c93ff4ab084a5a98675c9dad8
–that she didn't know they would travel,
that they just suddenly were gone.
f84c74d466dc4c6c8b97beb6ece21c01
It sounds terrible for
an eleven-year-old girl and her little brother.
9e80e91643a945d89ff164ad5dc5b5b1
7,000 Danish refugees,
mostly Jews–
c00167fefedf4bf9b42c908b295c01a8
–take to the boat over the sound between
Denmark and Sweden in a few months.
6d252eee6cae4b8a8092fc2763ee5ad9
Arne Jacobsen and his wife
continue to Stockholm.
5e66ed7d296b427aaae9045d57158348
But for Jacobsen, who introduced
modernist architecture in Denmark–
81f981d1f65044c589b1de26f14fc811
–with the House of the Future and the housing
area Bellavista north of Copenhagen–
b8a149c702de46b284b69663343de102
–the career gets a sudden end.
3443942b38ec411aa59db18f015a761a
He got no commissions on the same level
as he had gotten before the trip.
c39edc0de77246508e0b5e4fb824981d
But grandmother
was educated textile artist–
38dc47a6f42e49349647bf2331d73443
–and had already before the trip exhibited
textiles based on Arne's images.
9298f6f2bfae4383b718ac26a7096d79
And they continued with that up there.
363e6ec14c444a29eb755c05fa163f0
Just like for Josef Frank
the flight from Hitler–
7987d80cf0704204ab79ad8f4d56d549
–leads to him searching in himself and
finding a blooming dream landscape.
3bd686a1aa5845ff93aa0977a6db2b23
He was incredibly interested in botany–
1fec4ab4578041a7810f8f046a68a379
–and knew very much about plants.
c798751eaa8c43fcb66dac9d559cd834
And so they made
a sea of fantastic fabrics–
6d1642e4c7b549a59cf501e824370e04
–with plants and flowers.
b74a3e6dde184a94a606027e103400ed
100 years since we got self-determination,
but how much do we determine?
c6961f56f574471ea5fd44239b95463
How many of us
live as we have desire?
2103469080a74659b68b2922470560fe
Desire... Oh dear!
2971deaa87c04ccd8051cc0f5e2d92b7
Then you are natural, and that was just...
5139e28b596e4617b0c4cb92b018b535
In Stockholm can Poul Henningsen
write satire freely again–
26ce5429835b403787cf9cc054b9e292
–but to make a living he begins
to fold lamps in cardboard.
d946bba65a99441bae596f2f70dfd5b5
He had to settle for what was available.
9af8589b79e04a768ba08cf21c531f32
You find after some effort a little paper,
and it becomes a production–
30e24b50bf4044d9b35542abfb666a9a
–that becomes both ceiling lamps,
pendant lamps, and table lamps.
9acc68e65b3c4d2192d04b7fa73bab9e
When Poul Henningsen
and Arne Jacobsen–
7a28c8a83896495eb2aa06555127f23d
–together with 7,000 other
Jews and outspoken anti-Nazis–
b4b4a12fb7cd43bca4d1648aa5681849
–are in exile in Sweden–
fe9d8c7d4b4148bcad7910fe687c4b7f
–there is a daily life in the homeland
for many others.
9139b95bd5864e1187641de3b349aa27
One of them is the Danish
furniture designer Finn Juhl–
e59230bcb06a46b785e5204ad93bb2d7
–who creates unpredictable forms
inspired by nature and art.
f7333b9acb6042e6aa53333e9d12f303
His furniture he sees as sculptures.
68702a998a3a4e7eb3dbd33f35a3c94a
Finn Juhl makes slender constructions
that are simultaneously organic forms.
b0fc8b3d5fa9418baa2aab0c70d81c6a
He is inspired by Egyptian furniture art
and wants to bring out the animal-like in furniture.
8efc30c86af7417b9730c9733b3c7aca
He translates the rather cold
Central European modernism–
57712080898b43bcb1c75d81c9218327
–to something more human
with animal-like, flowing forms.
eb26c639f5e81440b1b5e5efdaf65e21
In Denmark Finn Juhl is called
"building deaf" by critics–
8468f3223a3e4b01bd597ddbfa3bd514
–and the prominent designer
Børge Mogensen–
3f4810c5611e4a94901cf7084f308703
–accuses Finn Juhl
of mixing cocktail furniture–
d3d75c2b405b4367ac607377d40377cb
–instead of creating function
for ordinary people–
03db4b880b9e4322b71498a3a0043527
–something that was Børge Mogensen's
own motto in his design.
74de0161d5834d028699b3958647baf8
People laughed at Finn Juhl in the beginning–
d9facb9b6d29459383a9722503c43eaa
–because his furniture is so sculptural,
almost no longer furniture.
fc38736587174cafa91703dd7824748d
But as ridiculed as Juhl becomes in
Denmark, as loved he becomes in the USA.
4caab3f245a34dde8945b8bd3cc328e3
He furnishes the UN headquarters
in New York and Denmark's embassy.
ee168a4c88f44c9a9f4684d06f550bfd
He doesn't make furniture
for workers' two-room apartments–
03d7a0826ad8464ab8d317b6c89ccd53
–but he makes art. Which provokes.
99ecf61202d447caa84ba7eb57a7eb3a
Juhl lays the foundation for the Danish
modernism's breakthrough in the world–
9b291bb0fa2248cb9462e597e88addf6
–but the designer's success story
gets a sudden end.
f3085b337e9940e39c7bbd97fd586c6c
Finn Juhl is one of the greatest
in the 50s and 60s.
c33c3a3a1ece4a3f913d91ffd2952e05
His furniture is manufactured in the USA, but then
the world changes and we get pop culture.
a9d1c5f800a3411b8ccdc300ac08cd02
Plastic furniture and synthetic
materials come, and then it goes downhill for Juhl.
903894129f7540a29ba71ad96c32d6ab
No one is interested in his furniture.
c1f6d7dfe4574685bd28402e94b8e7ad
I wanted to interview Finn, but a Japanese
who was knowledgeable about Denmark claimed–
8b9e532caaa7485aa41f70e5d1af70c0
–that he had severe alcohol problems
and was largely forgotten in Denmark.
15864d7e14ca43249b8c2b184b158b7b
So everything I heard was negative,
but I wrote to ask for a meeting–
4265b4bd50cc494dbe58147dbc4480a0
–and when I went there
I was warmly received.
209ef1d69f2d4db4b30998832456afd6
After that we kept in contact for six years.
c17640661c9b44518968e8bd7a153352
The friendship between Mr. Oda and Juhl
lasts until Juhl's death in 1989.
ec0b994132414005ad36d4358f6f7dd6
Then Mr. Oda has had exhibitions
with Juhl's furniture in Japan–
bbeb94f9c5d746b5be8714d87df35d1d
–and slowly but surely
the Danes begin to look–
c080502214fc444cad19662d7d2c76c6
–at their eccentric and possibly
building deaf designer with love again.
d759ef46b0874da9b0e91d8a97c2ae37
When Germany occupies Norway
during World War II–
4723830d61314cddb5884b1b52edc741
–they are met by both a military
and a civilian resistance.
2691c1d4c3c34609ade72c315fbe3d02
But the resistance lives dangerously,
and eventually many have to flee.
9f45f3f3fcb74fab950544ae94249596
One of them is the Norwegian goldsmith
Grete Prytz Kittelsen.
dff4493c8a824679a7d91fef1d598cf7
As so many others
was Grete active in the resistance–
cb5ef1f5bd804c6c873de344949e5870
–and there came a point
when she could no longer be in Norway–
4601c06beb774bc1ad8262cd89236a3f
–so she fled on skis over the border–
45236a4e2c8f458b9c8262cd89236a3f
–and settled in Sweden.
7cdae4bf5d614e87860abb01ce83f3b6
The goldsmith Grete Prytz Kittelsen
is one of nearly 50,000 Norwegians–
cac4702b91754aeb9bb512d6ea0fbb80
–who have to flee to Sweden.
b9ac61aecf5a4bb88efda4ba07ef30c1
In Stockholm it was
very many Norwegians who socialized.
e560dd32122947a48ac5cff8ff80df68
And one of them she had had
as a teacher, the architect Arne Korsmo–
258c0ab7ea9e4c91bdd9a3b4658a8eb4
–got she such a good contact with–
04c76fa33e9c4ed7a9cca40666185c0e
–that they married under a lunch break
on the embassy in Stockholm.
b4df7ee476284b4e8657f543a249b2bb
After the war they return to Norway
and become their most powerful design couple.
80772d19ac894dc39d8270a9157655fc
Here they design and build a house that
is both their home and workplace.
1ef4d87021944c5cb5ccf5693cd71573
The house on Planetveien 12 in Oslo
becomes modern architecture history.
b8caec1526d04fc0995425408c1fb537
Together and separately they design
cutlery, plates, vases, and bowls–
c83e41da62344d9ca38f19a3070f3a7c
–for the post-war modern home.
70397658a5224935b7b894f99ff644da
It was a time marked
by reconstruction after the war.
83a22f58691e41ebaf2fd6e5886e156b
There were many who needed
new things for their homes:
e93f336875e14865b6bb22a43c240dd0
Plates, plates and bowls. And people
wanted to go out and party and have jewelry.
89da8c6765b148a94ed41f22e857099
It was a good time
for Norwegian product designers.
97222b4fd15e4591bed4893c738fe3ec
Here is an example in enamel,
a very popular ashtray–
d80fcbb897724569b10a2e4660426f40
–that among others was delivered
to the White House.
4e49cc5a647b451186db05afc2f268fd
I like clean, clear colors–
ffb3f75843f74f36b918b1658136475e
–and when working
with transparent enamel on silver...
8696557caee5432fbdf2f5776bb180d3
What has been important for me
is that I make a whole of it.
d95f7c73e6044a558b7fccef9c17fad9
I work with the silver, so that it gives
light and shadow and shines through.
cf3eba1f35274576bd4ded1ea2ce99ba
Grete Prytz Kittelsen becomes
"the queen of Scandinavian design".
21e73321065b4016912348850df856b4
But it is an abhorrent pattern
designed by Arne Ingemann Clausen–
9ee52496a2c14f67a9b1497abe661f61
–that makes her
"the people's designer".
5f9f33aae4784a8bad164398a8350877
Grete wanted gladly
that if there should be pattern–
e4aee71dced147f8898b52f0771d1de5
–so it should be engraved in the metal
and fit beautifully with the form.
5727fa0f1a984e63948155ee6063df63
Then it was produced in Cathrineholm's
factory in Halden at the Swedish border.
628990dc6cb040689c933e8d68020c5b
They had a panel housewives
who should choose patterns.
a40f1e9871f7432b8dc2b873c8f3c8b8
One of the patterns Grete had not made,
but the housewives preferred–
688034d2ef9b44ffaaf60e10c62ac671
–a lotus pattern Grete did not like.
She did not like such decoration.
68d15c1f50d84526aacc38a376b5ff14
But it was produced and became a hit.
39f345c968ad4bb2a5dda55deda8d8ee
Grete Prytz Kittelsen's
pots, plates and coffee pots–
95cbf75fc22044d98da9f4768fc2c43d
–are mass produced
at the Cathrineholm factory–
a924564996884dab85b8aac01f9222c8
–but to her great disappointment,
with the abhorrent pattern on.
07e450a77ec049238cd79abbbeda8470
And when the TV series Mad Men recreates
the 60s, the Lotus bowls are brought out.
e4260f5b4655444db78595cca6c861a8
If Grete Prytz Kittelsen
is "the people's designer"–
6cdb212194264791a7be38b4b8069add
–it is completely the opposite for the young
carpenter Bruno Mathsson.
6d04fedfdf37467ba0417557b0fe0aaf
He shakes up all of Sweden.
Yes, actually large parts of the world–
7e1b517c66324518bcc3d8a00c0639f3
–when in the beginning
of the economically pressed 30s–
daa0936ac63d444ea3caf180ece3e9fc
–he does something so drastic
as to undress a chair.
3b3ef8fb65f542fdbf28a7c1321c581c
In seating furniture they had
a lot of stuffing and springs.
d5ff2a82711d4aaca805f9bd3a185397
Cost-wise it became
also at that time too expensive–
ecc1fd45bd364e689076b0dbeb8e8778
–so I undressed a chair down to
the bottom and came down to saddle straps.
a0090002f9564b0a993bad3417e6eb46
Saddle straps you have had for a long time.
4e2813d76e9e4cb99372df4d36a0ccbc
On 1700s chairs
it is a saddle strap underneath–
3bfc291e9f0c488da677769b994dd4bc
–then a stuffing of tow or something
and then comes the actual fabric.
f81125310f214bd8ba3c1ab2513366cc
To leave it raw with the construction
visible was very innovative.
4e2813d76e9e4cb99372df4d36a0ccbc
For the general public
you must have been ahead of your time.
d93b84b0adac4415bc2639dcb18e938b
Yes, I am probably still–
fad9ffdf9b3246e598535ada1ff31185
–so it is probably more extreme people
and esthetes who have embraced the ideas.
dfb3b86b5ff84455b70ec66850686760
Innovative and economical.
e91319c1d59a474989eed47b877c88e0
Mathsson gets down the price considerably by
removing the expensive stuffing.
4bac3c8089c5404683bdc6517dcc8e51
But the undressed chair, which is
ordered for Värnamo hospital–
d72a6158350b4c8d9580c882a73fc588
–is too radical and too rational
for the staff at the hospital.
e7ab5467a9904785b77f244d0114fc8e
They called it the Grasshopper
at the hospital–
5223390d87974e4eb8caa267fd3b9437
–and the nurses thought it was
so ugly that they put it in the attic.
050baccbe3434747b6e0c5421b7d959a
No, the experiment with the Grasshopper
became a fiasco–
28e733d365b545ef85e0c895baf244d3
–but Bruno Mathsson is only occupied
with one thing, the mechanics of sitting.
eb6698f1034440daa7124f2021262c0b
By purifying the sitting curve–
5d52945ebb4f46b9ac09d4971371b6f7
–I could build with saddle straps
as the bearing material.
8b824115176d471fb82a6a2c2ff27f2d
But to get variation in this–
c42c42c416a54bcf97636ab636fb1e60
–I dressed it up again
with different fabrics.
31a5bb5360784875942c14519746df8e
It is told that he goes out in
the winter and sets himself in a snowdrift–
1b012f798c5849d19ee349d87e5ca10f
–and then measures up the curve
of his own body–
d53ed6b443c54e0ca35f7805f9d1d72f
–to find
the right ergonomic form for the back.
2b9aa4f344094d538a23b425b9ac3cb9
This he then uses
in his various bentwood forms–
ac585e39e6e94ae08fd1e997c964e522
–to have perfect support for the back.
f1ea5f34fc064b0caee9860cd9f18f7a
Bent laminated wood
is a modern technique–
d075a5e654b043faab39f699b7ab0e0a
–which among others the designer
Alvar Aalto uses.
560c1f3ad0b344359af4bf1cefc17cbc
Bruno Mathsson takes over the method
for his chairs to also sag.
a9e88f53d5f04e398062796bf5e5b72b
I always tried to make chairs so
one gets a more relaxed way of life–
aab09d8e127f4609ab2434d1e640ba6e
–and can relax from hard work,
to get rest in other words.
839770fbade4452da7c238b76e21a80a
And the chair at Värnamo hospital
got vindication with time.
b670285492104667a627983ad4d6aedb
When I later broke through,
they changed their minds–
b397815d683f46a1ae075b7011361bae
–and took it down again
and thought it wasn't so bad.
bd273af68dfd44aca51e45c64e4751c4
The war in which Finland
has been involved is now over.
69d822d7b2aa4e0b8f5f96b1e3fefae4
The civilian population
has with admirable courage–
3cf3591f038147c88a0b5e93c24916b0
–resisted terror
of daily air bombardments.
fa2843e755de4e5c9d106addbd1e7bf4
When the war ends, Finland stands
on the losing side–
c058b19616964853ac2b4601bd2c9e37
–but retains its independence,
and a time of reconstruction follows.
7d2e638ba4034165876ef75ec8043ab5
It is now
that a small Finnish stool is designed–
398f9e76770c43abb28a47c206e3c31d
–that is part of solving the future's
diplomatic crises.
e39ce75a04864c48a18696cdd5229fd6
–What are they building there?
–Helsinki's newest hotel.
d52075c316104ef08e5881c7cd8d48d8
There the games' official visitors will stay.
62d665ae60e7461f9abdf25251f9e085
The construction project was grand and should
be seen as a unified art work.
04dd3396683546ecabd996ff8ee460a0
In addition to the architecture,
all interior was designed solely for that building.
9b340f83817c447698b3937c561dbae2
To the hotel's sauna,
the heart of the modernist dream–
9ac9005504d349d0b6c839f85716fe08
–designs Antti Nurmesniemi
a horseshoe-shaped sauna bench.
721b68f86f794931b186eea125601d8f
The building was very modern and
represented the new modernism–
a4503f7a6e7648488645ff9762fb469f
–while the bench was the traditional
in new guise.
04030e3875bc41b0bc7ab4951fcbb2a7
The bench with hole in the middle and sloping
sides so that the water runs down–
d1dd9bd620e049009d0476249d5cd096
–will play a central role
in the Finnish sauna diplomacy–
402e99d0e9644d67ad46c5f042a84af8
–when Finland's president
has important political meetings in the sauna.
397e1e634c604507a1b5e5efdaf65e21
Sauna diplomacy meant that Kekkonen
invited Finnish politicians to the sauna.
139b4ff9067844b08615ebceca978229
Issues were discussed in a relaxed
environment – the sauna is relaxing after all.
b91b37264a244d028a624466e0085ca3
It becomes easier to make decisions
in a pleasant atmosphere.
eb43773988754ea08973cdabd1610cb5
During the Cold War continues Finnish
politicians their conversations in the sauna–
a3c5c0a93b7c4b22b9550d722cc5a0df
–but now with Soviet leaders.
5046674a4e67486fb8232ac1e7a564b1
The stable sauna bench was created
for the peaceful world–
2dcde75293fc4cfb8485047576c4ef83
–but gets instead to bear heavy loads–
961f145c27174784ae551edfa78df1bb
–when naked world leaders
have hot discussions on it.
e479ac773cb24df0a18696cdd5229fd6
Sauna diplomacy has lived on.
025eb020fc304485904aa2efd90f2336
Finland's embassies abroad
have used their saunas–
40b00f3013a2488b831c143af4756b7f
–as meeting places for diplomats.
22061566c14f4798932c91a58879c65b
In step with people moving
from countryside to cities–
a1914bff08d34283ae8b44a5c23027d5
–many of the middle class women become housewives.
32b2fbf754804ea4a3fb6f0a9d6d5dc3
Studies are made
to streamline the kitchen work–
89a134610cd14607959176ae4c1e623d
–and the designers
Nils and Kajsa Strinning invent–
7f78dd193e15489abc78171885d292f8
–both a wastebasket
and a revolutionary dish rack–
ad67cba5beb4412193605a8fceffc805
–to relieve
the poor housewife.
6ec55a9d7db94df99873a0261e087bad
I can go into a kitchen
in Switzerland or Germany–
2bd108970c204f97b44787dfad5f2130
–and if I have something to throw away
and open a hatch in the sink–
1c42d2be5dba4772af2cdcac80391feb
–then there sits one of those.
6ceb95ed67194174a91c16f62c344d4e
Nils and Kajsa Strinning are popular
in radical housewife circles–
b76c1ff924be466994018cf78aec37c5
–just because they see the invisible
work that housewives do.
b45bd51ac6904096960e033c85a96cdf
They continue
to experiment with the dish rack–
9adf952078ec4b6f98f66fee6611197a
–and one day Nils lays boards
on the plastic-coated steel wire rods.
18c36fa04a104238a44ffeffacea0829
I rushed out to my wife
and drew up the little ladder.
158c26b1a0354afe921c42679e37e81d
She pushed it aside and said
that we had so much other to do.
a6c5a9848b6743ff930ddd968ab036f3
But when I get rejected by her
can it be something really good on the way.
1ffeda27b904442898b4d763adb74c95
What Kajsa says is this:
37c8e8af8dc345a59141080eb4342750
"Often she saw to that the ideas
were refined and documented."
b4ef24e77faf48f7b169773a5f641ffd
It sounds like everything.
381d01d569274d839baf1403cf7f8eac
What is it in this thing
that makes it so interesting?
b5a9b98c13f14de784275214adbc71a7
Well, call it...
86e15fe1007e49779d681be10c52538e
"Elegance" perhaps is a good expression.
8ea479946cdf4ec9a6f0caa35125ed6d
Well, perhaps it is the elegance that makes
the String shelf into a classic–
5a942774bb5146c3bd55cc9773f0d2e4
–and has written Kajsa
and Nils Strinning into design history.
6f594171f25d4198aa4135bd45dbb7b5
For surely it is so that we all
want to be remembered for something?
caf99f1cd50542ca8c418848dc638827
In Norway is the designer Bendt Winge
known for this stackable chair–
371c75b4efa84cad9c2f3f15d8f70171
–that has been sold
in more than seven million copies.
bb89f022bb9244c1bd89dadf3bd6225e
But his real masterpiece,
the chair Condor, designed 1959–
fa34bfe4ba6445b4bf607adea3c7ce38
–was manufactured only in a few
copies that disappeared and were forgotten.
a383aee7904e4a0cbc619f88a46a1d0
Today exists the only
remaining copy here in Japan.
f7d1020666894cae9ba704f0e3fe5024
This is
Bendt Winges chair with high back.
bb809d38c3cc46eea8927bfd37a4ff42
In Denmark there was
a design magazine called Mobilia–
2ec4e6c6ff104e709bbe4753d4742453
–and it had a full page with the chair.
9018d7ec5a5243c993109d234d586664
So it was surprising
to see it in a shop in Daikanyama.
aac1f16068ad4b0fb40fd66634336d0d
I thought
that it should be preserved for posterity.
f8e69aa260054a46b9a8c7286ced0d06
This set is probably the only
copy that exists in the world.
97bc8521bacc467bb1c9387d0b5af96c
The chair that almost disappeared
stands now safely with Mr. Oda–
428dd6438c90496d832a3042dcfd9811
–and perhaps that will make Bendt Winge
now be remembered–
1e088dc2e178430c80c372a42c1d1244
–for the chair that he considered
his artistic pinnacle.
e0bd477bfaea4c25b6263425177b5135
If you could only choose
one chair from this house–
b7ba2ee13c7e462796566ef6a2b6d5c5
–which one would it be?
b7c9befdb2ab4ce697820c2983097e71
Well, then it would be this one.
It is small also.
4ed4b90ba0174713af5e680cdeb66532
I don't need larger things anymore.
99fdc951926943a19dc5b0abcebdbd16
This is...
5c0da1b3d58b4e2d9e7b15134355d890
Hans Wegner.
27d1e70246c84a89a3ed92dd7ba8e8b6
A chair is something you can sit on,
and should be made as simple as possible.
277baf816ebd4660b86991218b2aa950
And that it gets the expression I have myself,
cannot be helped.
1f22313785894cc482552613c4e3527d1
I don't know why they look like they do.
They just do.
3e44542274c84f92ba90a71f1f3dbeb2
Hans Wegner creates during his lifetime
around 500 chairs.
36cfe60910854e03ad8f56bad6f91b51
The goal for each chair
is to find "the furniture's inner soul"–
b47ff80fadc84ef0ba962df988011345
–a driving force
that overshadows everything else.
a80af5e78de74c8a8f1276b1d4640a7a
When I was 6–7 years old
I heard him say to a visitor–
02357256a3f54f05be140c880a3ef7fb
–that the chairs were his children.
68f202403e67456791740325df210aac
"That doesn't fit!"
Those were I and my sister.
7e7345d7ed444335a1e593db898d420e
But that I have understood afterwards,
that so it was.
819ffc16603e4e68a7d75ff6da1627f7
Better than all other designers.
6003cec0262f4a48b724a172c6f6f832
For me it is about
his understanding of the materials.
b2b17019a95543a5baa5fe18a9310bec
He never made anything that was impossible.
34d8a9cd610f4a469a14715710842f33
He had thought through everything
from how the materials work.
624a2b9c010d4b6ea231ef5abd97905e
The wood's properties must go hand
in hand with the human body.
b2883afdc94942c2917179ac091c1532
A sitting person...
469b7123804347538d445140335f1e97
Here is the back support, and it is important...
70d68df9a3dd4d4dad8b65a73ae724ed
...that the back's internal curve feels...
the back support.
82cced8a0e94464e9ff609ad07f73c2a
When Hans Wegner begins
as a carpenter apprentice at 14 years old–
0f63165d9a7d49ed9add3455a821dd71
–he has no idea that his furniture craft–
16afce56b59749ee8ee5d18b5d3a3178
–one day will be part of deciding
an American presidential election.
bc546139dcf94fdb9588c4f2083d148f
What senator Kennedy says
many of us can agree with.
aa846ad95fe44265b7873519c4bf70f2
We can under no circumstances
discuss the United States' affairs.
630931ded0e44b028152187643a28f7d
Kennedy looked so elegant
when he sat in this chair.
d370fb44fadc43699da253168d7cc945
But Nixon looked like
a little schoolboy.
bae10561fe2740c6a8550a252e33a37b
He didn't know where to put himself.
1400a5d537ff40ce9e1a992e3f740e64
It might have had significance for the election.
4f334165c5114c87869d65d9cf59cd68
It was not the chair's merit,
but it participated in a big event.
0be82ac3a805498aa847ba1ba6604638
...under its worst attack so far.
2487363a1ba442ab80bc13fa1259b308
My father was not one who bragged,
but we felt on his deathbed–
5b9f4aefd1394950a20dcdb143664457
–that it was a great recognition
that it got to be on such a place.
3d736efb5bbd4c6eb8748ba28b6b22b2
It was big,
for he became known abroad.
9e17f62e48894d9c836e24c62157bcfa
Americans came to Denmark
to see what we were doing.
4fa1ee4c04f146b2b7dc247e1668f8c0
The chair becomes an icon for the organic
modernist furniture design–
c4ec4b175312473395b60f32707f32d7
–but it is also a milestone
for Wegner himself.
980a6a16490a454892ff91dbb0409473
Yes, that chair is probably
Wegner's most important work.
0b84dcbc9806497685b4851c89da0982
He found his own style.
7a6f6c3760e14440913d1c14483bc681
Much of what he had done before–
3dffc1d9eb184941a253fd9c7e7515ef
–was interpretations of other designers' works
or other cultures' design.
55aa4b17f4ca41aaaac2ffa992a73b5a
But with that chair
he found his way to his own style.
babb6d49915e4566882c0dec08eab1d3
What will your next chair look like?
56919f9028bf46ea8f15375e8d5b9fd7
I don't know.
f32327b5642944b198d11e424930df81
It can be anything.
1efbad2975d24eda9a07d63e18c5adbe
When Poul and Inger Henningsen and
Arne and Jonna Jacobsen are in Denmark–
44e9f9e476134a20ba983515575956b0
–they reunite with their families.
b3edd503296348b1b8c3e4451a93303e
The memories from the perilous flight over
the Øresund are still there for all.
ae566500b73e4005bc8993afbaf620c7
They didn't know
when they would come back.
3ecac1089a954d0a97cfd0645eb87889
The children might not forgive–
a4e8d171dae14f6ab8eeb90a87a76a38
–but they forgave their mother,
and the family reunited.
f4127ac97983412aa1c8cc682f15b7ef
That I find fantastic.
d96c87bbea0a4d6ba67154771c2fd6c5
In Copenhagen wants Arne Jacobsen to begin
a completely new chapter.
380043e322de4907b891222351dfe561
He is attracted by modern materials
and the industry that can mass produce.
c46eedafa38841bb982217e5f60d1c43
With molded plywood
he creates a light, stackable chair–
db252378f1ff49648df0acee715347da
–with minimal material use–
500852b37d294f0a9ad31bcc3a8cfb19
–that at first meets skepticism,
but soon is loved by a whole world.
d247e425bdae4371aa9deab09d1e20f8
The Ant has such a special form.
6860e4d336e54f8895b000cee4bac2cd
The form you might think is just nice–
54d1646fa76c490bae14ce3d0a978bb2
–but it is a prerequisite
for making the chair nimble.
cc658dd759b5466bbcbdd1aae29355dd
It was a response to the post-war period,
everything should be modern.
cf50779df5704fcba746a3a0e7ca5233
But had a completely different type
of industrialization.
532741cc41124236a783306e67a38ea8
But wanted to leave the old Denmark
behind.
fb02702c71284f46b20acead57e72fa7
If it is not nice to be natural...
f3f011bb89cd48f18658c37065c64de2
...I don't want to be nice.
e9a561c5a6a14b41a967d538975f4852
Poul Henningsen who always wanted
to create a soft and pleasant light–
5bdb2a16719b4938ba2a7cd86fecf39d
–gets problems during the post-war period,
when the light bulbs quickly develop.
600a9ade8195465d93b10484bc144131
Those who call themselves light technicians–
df48c4194799451a9f7b6805215e6e98
–have never seriously
cared about the light's colors.
c453691542e741f7a99a8c4d19fc2eea
It is they
who give life and light its richness.
744604290485422cba87f39726a43a90
Now no longer suffice
his three-shaded lamps–
5dd83c8dbcce461e8d7e7f42bac8d872
–that made such success
at the Paris exhibition 1925.
1e00957487f644988ba322e951696e8f
What Poul Henningsen does is a lamp
that completely encloses the light.
cba0693afb88470f9699d80b102ffc8a
He makes namely the very, very
famous PH5 lamp.
d76150d7e4a54081a6c4265d42e27007
It has four reflective screens–
1eb8ff6e0c734dda8a7409ae0f4f4e26
–but it also has screens inside that
make the light warm and a bit red.
9ba92245b74940ea9b466f943059cf2d
It begins to be produced
when Denmark has high prosperity.
32548aba5ad54a68b538db2c6dbb02f0
Soon there is a PH5 lamp
in every fifth Danish home.
ad12e7defcc9441f91a92141d8edac31
Poul Henningsen also creates the
glare-free but complex lamp Artichoke–
0262f2a9fec140d0b752ff01fd09c854
–or the Thistle
as it is also called.
3b3c42d37d284f6d92dcc83a9f1ca116
In the time and in sync with prosperity
lies that one travels on charter trips.
1e0bf0b0870949fba0cfa67ac241e81f
It is now Arne Jacobsen erects
his foremost work, SAS Royal Hotel–
a6adda0fb8c548e8951e27da56d992fc
–an airport terminal with hotel–
c44803c748de41eba5342f30d66c6b79
–and Denmark's first skyscraper,
right in Copenhagen.
e7549361c08643d0b418e349c1a9f7f3
For Jacobsen was it an all-artwork
and everything fits together – big and small.
823919f2fe5c482d943ea33245993578
He did the layout,
the color scheme and the textiles.
c63c6803fc8c42b18aa749386c8cb819
He designed
the furniture, the door handles... Everything.
198302a90ba143f087adac0bd6ee4476
And the for the hotel specially made,
futuristic cutlery–
861a9e07aad84985a01138cfd2eaacfc
–with erased boundary between
handle and blade become film history.
e5860b14e4fd41b9a88d56d8e63c33f8
–How is it going?
–Fantastic. We have nothing to complain about.
5a5605395e5a494b81bfdc797c305d0c
And probably the most talked about cutlery
that has ever been shown on the big screen.
76beee3a7fd644fbb61f2fee9d266a6b
When Danish design is at its greatest
it gets a new life in Iceland.
405d8f22c1e240449f6db7ec7f39e722
It is when Icelandic Halldor
Hjálmarsson goes to Denmark–
e51c8120367d43779251e439dafb33a0
–to study
at the School of Arts and Crafts.
8aa86bee91bf49eb8186f03bc298bf4f
He had the luck to be there
just when Danish design...
39921c09caf3449db10a38ba03401ac5
...was growing. And became world-famous.
b6a9454bbb854de5a35dce2c01c1ef2c
His teachers were the time's
most prominent designers.
58f8bc2373ff435facb4bb6f282e749a
Poul Kjærholm
was his main teacher–
4c8ccfd9d52146328a82dbf9a9e1e28a
–and his supervisor and friend.
64a9989ef0914ab9bbb12b17a7d5ed10
Danish designer Poul Kjærholm,
carpenter by trade–
de99dba5d3b8496588b5ec83cced33fb
–often chooses to leave wood as material.
048e7d8b5a9b4cf3b93f4be2bffdd25f
He is modern and prefers to create
in steel and leather–
e9cea0f2bb3b45f7869d9031b10946af
–something that makes impression
on Halldor Hjálmarsson.
e1c5b58a99ea4f50a1e10a3129a2f987
He also lets himself be inspired
by Arne Jacobsen–
59ce9e3717f64f66bd9601b9cae8877d
–and decides to make
an Icelandic and more stable version–
ac5f9d87a8c445c39a6e9a9c580147ae
–of the success chair Ant.
00b6ef9a7d2d41d09a41236e8a951428
The model is the Danish Ant
that came 1953.
34a596d85e0c4a818a7b3d5c9f2a8cff
But a problem was
that the back went broken.
1715271dcf72414db0f111784e86d67b
It had only three legs,
and the attachments were quite complicated.
d440ee8fe2814810a9341db1efac59d3
With that as starting point
he begins to think–
e464d0e343e6456e81090a73c04880f2
–and the result becomes the chair Skata.
53302137b4504d55bd6c02c8be460be5
With Halldor Hjálmarsson comes the
modern material and form–
0095340b83694bf1ba10f9021188e9cb
–to the traditional Iceland,
but now with a whiff of the Atlantic.
1405e3cfdb8448999657ab7d75e2ae7b
The thought behind the chair is poetic,
the form is inspired by the fish rockfish.
db788ccabed2400195517ca660c6879d
And the attachments he develops
to simplify assembly–
8a44c1c13cd44ffcbba02bd16b3389d7
–are an allusion to the rockfish's eggs.
b3247fb1bbd14e90ac92e82f67220cf7
It lays four eggs in an egg capsule,
"mermaid's purse" in English.
b3e0aa69b51547be81bcc960392bedcd
So the chair is in a way a sculpture.
3f6f14872e1a4df78880df7f7acc7697
With Halldor Hjálmarsson becomes the
Danish ant to an Icelandic rockfish.
c65b260efc42428e9df261fb4ce91890
And when the designer gets commissioned
to furnish Reykjavik's first café–
8014289950fb416b965489b43ae753a9
–he does it as a tribute
to his old teacher in Denmark.
7545f3a8067243a29e35c9a9970f334d
He designed the whole place,
both the layout–
32552004fa3b40a3bd8e7b609a37046c
–and also the furniture,
which is specially made for the café.
4b2d90f22c684cffaedb99700ea49794
The furniture is inspired by Kjærholm,
he uses a lot of flat iron.
26aa27f1673e47b19256ee3b61de57ed
Poul Henningsen and Arne Jacobsen's
perilous flight over the Øresund–
04ded7ade1b74670b2aa06555127f23d
–probably saved their lives–
c5a9a44487aa4938b7ce2df8afa7ff27
–but it is the design
that has made them immortal.
dde361067db6493f8d4175704960289c
And perhaps it is so
with all carefully made things–
742090c7cff1456cb82e9b06f16ddc
–that they outlive us.
c1f9d6635189425ca1eb79798b1fe5a3
In Higashikawa in Hokkaido, Japan–
6bd284a91ba8496da43888e3bb32ac0f
–prepares Mr. Oda to hand over his life's work.
dbe47684695f4d688e32a86359c60fd8
His dream is that the Nordic furniture
he has collected during his life–
e904c224768e432d929888a44dc36e24
–one day will become
its own design museum.
7e991a1489da46399cc2e3d49cf4d026
I am going to move away from here
some time to spring next year.
2ad1285209b74e29bea9647fcfbd1551
And I can not
take the furniture to heaven.
d1b36985d8b34a78aedd1590d0960c7a
With everything that I have done
and collected for my research–
1e135662b83346d9992531b58e7a23cf
–I want to give young people opportunity
to see solid objects and discover–
1ed61cdb5ff944f79a442e33a12e55bb
–that there is
something else than wear and tear.
a2927f34ee18485486cba84301b8e7f8
This is furniture
with very long lifespan.
330cc942b3ca45738ebfab756653dcea
One can see the roots.
Such a design museum I want to open.
afbc29943a54413a900eb09413be89b3
I want that young people
should understand craftsmanship of really high quality.
4732e8870ec949439203622708831026
On such a design museum
one could see the authentic originals.
fc748e812e4b413db77d1abea382adf8
I have always been fascinated by the 60s.
4e99090b229d411e8a0fa7f71cc1bb21
In this film
we will talk about plastics.
94c1a27503014d1094ceec95f5d8de9a
The magical year 2000 is approaching.
How will we live? What will we do?
8edfaf222d364b3aac44650229ed845e
Ignition sequence initiated. Five...
06f382a8def34f91968864067fc89f64
All colorful things
make me just so happy.
e07ea4fe886043ef96a4a32aeb72ec97
Translation: B Bäckman, Y Hellerud,
R Schicke, J Tegnborg
Svensk Medietext för SVT
e2a9bb49b64a4d1ea9bfeb77a9abbff6
Subtitles: Jenny Tegnborg
Svensk Medietext för SVT